Dr. Fenwick ... You're a neuropsychiatrist. And you are an expert in near-death experiences
and the phenomena accompanying the end of life.
Before I ask you, what is a neuropsychiatrist?
I'm a neuropsychiatrist. And that means I'm educated in neurology and psychiatry.
And I've been doing it for many years, but it's the perfect position because you move between the brain and the mind.
So you see into both of these branches and you can understand them better than if you were just a psychiatrist or a neurologist.
What was your daily job?
My daily job was to take care of people with brain damage and the psychological problems that result from this damage.
So I was struggling with epilepsy and had a large number of patients with seizures
they had disorders of consciousness of various types
so epilepsy could be used as a model of how the brain works and it was great
but in my research they were very diverse. With an interest in sleep,
with interest when the equipment for monitoring the brain structure came along
But first I was interested in electrical activity in the brain.
EEG and in fact one of the first articles I wrote was about George Harrison
Remember George Harrison of the Beatles?
He kindly stepped in all this and I did his EEG
when he meditated because he was behind the Maharishi
So he was one of the first EEG recordings in meditation I made.
so that also then became one of my interests, ie meditation .. a
near death unusual spiritual experiences that I studied
and then I became interested in near-death experiences
and that then led to an interest in dying and how we die.
In a broad sense, what can we learn from these scans?
So how neuropsychiatry can help us understand people.
Actually, very well, because you can see both sides of the picture. You can understand what's going on in their brain
you can understand what is going on in their minds, so you really have a very close relationship between these two things
But, it also leads you directly to the fundamental question of all time and that is: What is consciousness?
Is it all brain? Is it something out of the brain? William James (a well-known psychologist) many years ago at the turn of the century
He said that consciousness is beyond the brain and the brain fills it, as many people have since
And there are others, and the mainstream of modern science ignores this and says no, it's all brain function
and my view is that it's very limited and I don't think it's true for a minute
How you got to near death experiences.
I thought near-death experiences were nonsense, complete nonsense.
They only went to California and never crossed the Atlantic. I knew it and I said it.
When was it? That was sometime between 1978 and 1980.
Until someone showed up in my office who had an experience close to death.
He had a cardiac catheter in one of our hospitals in London.
The operation failed and he left his body during it,
he watched his resuscitation and then had a classic near-death experience.
So thanks to this example, I was able to study them.
And I came to the conclusion that they really are happening and have a lot to teach us.
So I changed my attitude from nonsense to very interesting.
How did you study these phenomena?
First, I took the individual cases that came to my hands
and I looked at them in terms of what people had experienced.
and I compiled several studies, some I was allowed to do and some not.
For example, in one of the hospitals, I wanted to study people in an intensive care unit.
and find out if they have near-death experiences during their stay
and when I presented this to the hospital's ethics committee
the man who ran the intensive care unit said:
None of my patients will have such experiences, it's a waste of time.
So I couldn't do this study.
So I set out on a different path, studying the experiences that people had.
And I've been very lucky since '87
I made a TV documentary in this country
and thanks to that we received 2 thousand letters
letters, things to open, not email. So we got 2,000 of them.
And that gave us a huge database
So I took the best, most relevant ZBS
and we sent out questionnaires to 500 of them
and from that came a sample. And from that, I learned a bite of important things.
First, the sample will never be repeated
because 98%
they didn't know about ZBS when they had ZBS.
so it automatically eliminates suggestions and things like that.
So it was very different.
Another thing I learned was that when you look at what caused ZBS
You will find that it was a very, very wide circuit
from cardiac arrest
after childbirth.
diseases, and things much more different than this.
and eventually you will come to people sitting in front of your (? far?) one evening
and they have near-death experiences, they have all the symptoms
and when they completed any rating scales, they were evaluated as
near-death experiences. So I understood that they are common in our society.
and the fact that they were only associated
With things like cardiac arrest, I don't think it would work
which Bruce Greyson and I did in America
So we said, OK, we want to study near-death experiences
and then we also want to know the state of the brain
And how can you know the condition of the brain of the woman giving birth?
You can't, it's too many variables.
And during illness, it's also too diverse.
So I took what I thought was most sensible when the brain didn't work
So I took near-death experiences during cardiac arrest.
So we spent a few years studying this.
So it was a big sample, did you get the whole spectrum of near-death experiences?
I think it was almost the whole spectrum in our culture.
it must be said that there are certain foundations that are culturally specific
for example, light tunnels are seen much more
in the western ZBS than in the eastern
and when you take hunter-gatherers, the experiences are quite different.
For example, there are beautiful simple near-death experiences
from the times of hunters-gatherers and so there is one example
One man had this near-death experience:
He got into his canoe, and rowed for 3 days
until he came to the island - it is his near-death experience - he did
and he had an ideal place experience on this island
They tend to be near death experiences, so his was quite different
Let's not forget the Japanese
when they leave, they usually do not pass through a tunnel, but come to a dark river.
he has to go, he has to find a ferryman who will transport them, so such things
So there are cultural differences that need to be recognized and accepted.
Does it depend on your worldview? In your background?
Yes, the reasons why there are cultural differences are very diverse.
It is definitely a view of the world, it is definitely a religious education
and it is definitely influenced by the culture in which you live, all these things have an impact.
What do you think is the value of ZBS research?
I think it has two important values.
One that must be the pinnacle of consciousness research.
And one of the things we find out is that powerful experiences change the people who live them
and people who have near - death experiences are changed by them and
this is an interesting fact to look at
their phenomenology gives us some idea of ​​the structure and properties of consciousness
So from this point of view, they are extremely good.
And because they are connected
I must emphasize that it is only a connection, they are much more extensive than this,
with cardiac arrest and experiences associated with real death
They are a good model of how we die.
So for all these reasons, I think they are very important.
Do you think near-death experiences provide any evidence?
that consciousness can exist without the brain?
Is consciousness independent of the brain? This is a very broad question. .
Can consciousness exist without the brain?
We don't have a way to find out, do we?
It's a good question, I formulate it a little differently.
I would say, mechanically correct: Is consciousness created by the brain?
for example, the gallbladder excretes bile, or the kidneys excrete urine
is a product of brain functions?
or is it actually a filter
there is a transcendent reality somewhere
which is filled with the brain?
So we get her reduced image
I think these are two questions. I know what my own answer is.
But this is not the usual answer.
And why is that so?
Why do I believe that consciousness exists outside the brain?
Rather than believe that it is excreted by the brain, such as bile.
The answer is, why would you think it's just a function of the brain?
And when you look at the arguments that are put forward there must be very high
correlation between brain damage and changes in the mind
and abilities and so on in a person with an injury
There must be a very high correlation, but that says nothing about causality
causality and correlation are quite different
and if you want really good authority for this statement
You can think of Penfield
Penfield was a very well known neurosurgeon from Canada
And Penfiled put electrodes in his brain, he was one of the first people to do so
and had a very good idea of ​​how the brain works and how it is connected
So he spent his whole life watching the brain.
Finally, he wrote a book about what he thought the mind was
and in the end he came to the conclusion that there was absolutely no doubt that neurons
they communicate with each other in very complex ways that we do not yet understand
But, the energy of the mind is different.
and so no matter how much you study neurons, in fact
You don't get the energy of the mind, so it's a different dimension literally.
this is the opinion of someone who has spent his whole life studying the brain
but on the other hand, you have philosophers like Dan Dennetta
which says it's the whole brain. I sat next to Dan Dennet once at a conference
and I said unto him, Dane, thou believest not of this, do thou?
when we understand neurons, we understand consciousness
He said: Absolutely. Once we understand the neurons,
so nothing else will be left. Maybe a tiny crumb like this and that's it.
It's just a brain, so we have two camps.
And every Tábor can provide evidence that it is right.
But of course I'm sitting somewhere in the middle. The brain is enormously important.
has great features
but you cannot explain consciousness with it
There is only one theory in the world about what consciousness is
And that is the theory of Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose
and she says that the brain is in microtubules - these are the structures in the brain-
behaves like a quantum computer
and that it is within the collapse of the wave function in these tubules
where consciousness, undifferentiated and unconnected, arises
so imagine that huge matrix of the brain
and these small points of consciousness entering the brain
then, of course, consciousness is woven into the brain and into the circuits in the brain
and it is then built into self-awareness. And that's actually the only theory I know
which actually allows the emergence of consciousness in at least some way.
So it's an important theory.
You wrote a book on the art of dying and described several
near-death experiences. Can you tell us something about them?
I wrote a book called The Art of Dying.
and I wrote it because I asked a question
which arose directly from research on near-death experiences
Research says you're going down a tunnel - in our culture -
You meet a being of light, you go into this transcendent reality
where you meet dead relatives and spiritual beings, your past life may be projected
then you come to a limit that you know will die if you cross.
so, it's a very compelling question to ask
Is this near-death model a model of what happens when you die?
Basically, we can't answer that, because how would you verify such a model?
What you will do is find out what the mental experiences of the dying are
In 2000, when I started this research, you could go to
PubMed, one of the major medical databases and ask questions like:
How many people published works on the topic of visions on the deathbed - about 5 at the time
How about end-of-life connection experiences - maybe one or two
so as you can see you could become a world expert very quickly - just looked at 7 works and you knew all the literature
so I'm trying to say that basically nothing like it was here.
so we went to the ethics committee and asked: Can we please talk to the dying?
So we can get an idea of ​​what the dying process is?
and it was back in 2000 and they quite rightly said
No, because you can disturb the dying. And why would they say that?
They said it because no one had done it before and they didn't really know
so we had to change direction, we had to do caregiver research
When you go to a hospice - today it is less noticeable, but before it was very familiar
then you find that it is divided into groups
There are nurses who are in contact with patients. You see all the phenomena of dying
and doctors who don't see them and say they don't
So there is a really significant difference between the two.
and I have some really interesting stories about
this gap between medical and nursing staff, but today it is less.
Yes? Tell us.
I'll tell you why I did it and tell you stories later, because it will make more sense this way.
So, the ethics committee said we can ask caregivers, but we can't ask the dying.
so we did nursing research
we did 3 hospices in nursing homes in this country
and we did 3 hospices in Rotterdam
to make some cultural differences, it's not very different, but it's quite far apart.
and we found the most fascinating things
it allowed us to put it together
Lots of different things to expect
The first thing that can happen to you is a hunch.
And that means you know you're going to die before you're diagnosed.
You'll find out in a dream ... maybe
or it suddenly comes to you that you're going to die ... soon
Are they patients or relatives? No, they are patients.
The Dalailama says that we all know 2 years before we die that we will die.
so this information is given to us. When you look in his book as we know it,
he says two things, one of which I understand a bit and these are changes in behavior
the second is that our breathing will change, but I don't know what he means
but I see that an individual's behavior can change
you may feel like you are dying and then your behavior will change
but he says it's very common, in fact, for everyone.
We didn't find this, we found it wasn't common, but not so rare that we didn't catch it,
occasional cases of this
Another thing that will happen is that
A few weeks before you die, visitors come to their death beds.
And what is a deathbed visitor?
They are relatives who come to you and do it in a specific way
they can stand outside the room in which you are dying
or they can come into the room and this is quite common
of course you will talk to them and a lot of them will sit on the bed and talk to you
Because it's extremely reassuring when someone sits on your bed
I mean, if you've ever had an old child, you know that when you talk to them, you don't stand over them, but you sit on the bed and hold his hand and so on.
So the relatives are sitting on the bed.
And we took hundreds of apparitions on the deathbed and analyzed them in terms of content.
and we figured out that
The most common people who come first are relatives.
mother and father are commonly seen
dead couples are quite common
but we also found that brothers and sisters walk as well
people you don't know only occasionally
animals
not much, I'm sorry, but your cat or dog probably won't come
so mostly they are closest relatives
and we also found in our sample
that spiritual beings are seen
spiritual beings behave a little differently than relatives
They tend to wait outside the hospice, they are seen through the windows
or they may come to the door and some will enter
I must emphasize that the cultural element plays a major role here
Because an article published by the American BibleBelt
It shows that angels are seen very commonly.
in our sample, only 3 percent of people saw an angel
so it's much less in our research, so I think it's a cultural part.
So there are relatives and spiritual beings, are there any other phenomena around dying?
As you approach death, you will enter the next phase
and in fact this needs to change a bit now
what we finally found out was that you were going to another dimension, the spiritual world
then you go back again, it's like you're used to staying in the spirit world.
so you go there, then back again, then there again, then back again.
and it was very important for people who were dying
and this is now changing
and I would like to talk to Monika Rentis' theory on this topic
because it is extremely important
Monica Rents is a theologian in Switzerland
and she had a lot of contact with the dying.
and to date has published 3 studies,
about patients dying of cancer.
and one study was, I think, with 60 patients, another with 240
recently conducted a dual study of hospices
And she found that what we said was right.
people really walk into this other reality.
but now that we come to the very process of dying.
which is extremely interesting and important
and we all have to learn it, we should actually learn it in school
and I think it's like dying like this:
Visitors come on their deathbeds
then, at some point, you realize that you will die.
and it will hit you hard
There's no going back, boys, this isn't going to be good anymore, it's a dying process
and that will leave you in a very difficult position
because you've never encountered it, you've always had some control over something, not now
so you have to start leaving everything, this is absolutely essential
you have to give up the fact that you will continue your life
you have to give up your wife, you have to give up your cat, your dog
you have to give up your children, your family, your house, your work, you have to give up everything
and if not, you will remain attached
and attachment is the hardest thing when you die
if you can give up everything, you will have a very quiet departure
You go out of this before the transition phase, where you are chained
to the transition phase, which leads to the post-transition phase
and in the post-transition phase you have given up everything
You immerse yourself more and more in the spiritual dimension I described, it's just like that.
and in the end you lost your ego
you have lost the part of you that is different from you
and you will become what is called "nonjuel"
it actually means that you have already connected with the universe
You have already lost all ties to your body and being human
and you have acquired this non-duality, which is a connection with the higher cosmos
So the idea is that you remain too attached to a lot
the things you have in this life when you go there.
You know, maybe you won't be able to see your mom again and say hello, probably not
but you will be able, you can see your mom, i don't know
but you really become part of the universe (space)
So the data shows us. The data shows that if you do not give up
all the things you are attached to
Then you will have a very difficult dying process
you have these two processes, one is merging with the afterlife
the second that keeps you here limits
And what happens after dying is harder?
Then you experience what is called spiritual unrest.
It is not a pleasant condition because you have a lot of anxiety.
and you are pulled back all the time, pulled back, it's not pleasant.
You should know that. So when you go to the hospice
you should be trained that you will have to give up everything.
So it takes you into the process of dying.
now before you die, i just want to add one more phenomenon
these are called temporary clairvoyance
temporary clairvoyance is when ... The Victorians called it
late awakening, basically
and the thing was, you suddenly sat in bed
you said hello to the people around you
you don't actually say hello, but goodbye because you know you're dying
and then you lie back and die, that's interesting in itself, but it's even more interesting
because people who are paralyzed and haven't moved for a whole year
in a long-term care home, they can sit down and do it.
so for those few moments, it seems that the nervous system is working properly again.
but even more interesting to me is that people who have Alzheimer's disease
and lost their memory many years ago
they suddenly sit down, meet their friends
they say goodbye, sometimes meeting their dead relatives, lying back and dying
so that's a real question for science,
because how can you do these things when you consider the argument that the brain creates consciousness
because it is a process of re-healing - things like this, just before you die
it doesn't make sense
so, then you will die
Now the show is not over, maybe it is from your point of view, but not from the point of view of your relatives
because many people have
close relationship
they will then, may make a visit
And this is important because as you approach death, you can actually
Postpone your death a bit, because at times, some visitors
at your deathbed they will say I will come again on Tuesday and you will die on Tuesday
but remember that we have two running versions, in one you have more control, you probably have a fix
so you can remember that you can negotiate with yours
relatives if you want to live a little longer
but if you really die and have the urge to go after yours, say daughter
or son
who could not be with you, so then you can visit them
and this visit is very specific
we have a lot of them and we analyzed them
and present at the time of death in 99% of cases within half an hour, but most directly at the time of death
and it depends on the mental state of the recipient of the visit
When you receive a visit when you are awake, then it will feel that way
someone you know is dying
feeling they wanted to
help in a certain direction
or you feel that a catastrophe is happening, it's many feelings you have
but if you are sleeping, it is quite different, you have a dream with a story and here is one example
the woman woke up, I think she was actually in a dream
and she saw her son standing at the end of his bed
and her son was wet
and her son walked closer and closer to her
and as he approached he entered the light
and he transformed, left her a message, which many of them do, and said it was all right
please don't worry, I'm fine
and then it all faded. The interesting thing is that she was in Australia and he in England
and when she could, due to the time difference, she called
and found that he had drowned in England at the time
and there was a component of what was happening that he wore wet clothes
and then its transformation and disappearance at the end.
so it's not an unusual story. Sometimes they just come
and pass the message, which is always fine, please do not worry
and then they leave, so it's called coincidence on the deathbed
in our ranks, 45% of the people who had them did not know that the person was dying
so in more than half of the cases it is not possible to tempt the explanation to expectations
And I don't think he actually expects ...
the expectation of one's death is a generally good explanation.
So that's a vision on a deathbed.
There are other phenomena that occur at the time of death
and these are
light in the room
The light in the room is fascinating, it can be very strong and act like
True light, in other words, light can flood a room
and can radiate from the room
Experienced by relatives?
only relatives
into the hallway
and then people can catch him
and we had one case of a person aroused during the night by a shining light who mistakenly thought it was a forgotten light in the hallway
and she saw the light coming from her aunt's room. Her aunt was dying. She went inside
and when you enter this light, it always has a spiritual effect, she reported it
and sat quietly with her aunt
and she slowly died. And as she died, the lights were lost. Extinguishing the light along with death is very common.
So another thing that can happen at the time of death, and when I say common
in our series, 45% percent of nurses reported
light in the dying rooms and in their conversations with relatives
but it's a little more complicated because I've talked to relatives
who were brother and sister
and one of them saw it and the other didn't, so I think it would be an interaction between
between a person and what happens during dying.
So that's the light. Another thing is the shapes leaving the body.
again quite common.
there are many stories about it and you
describe, first of all some people describe some kind of fata morgana
he sees coming out is a bit like a change in the atmosphere
and the other thing is that it can look like rising smoke
or it may have a clear shape
and they are all variations on the subject and it's like Betta's book of the dead
It describes these last faces of the dead, it describes mirage, it describes smoke
and then they go to our sky and to the white sky
which is something a little different, but it's a state further in line
so the shapes leaving the body are quite common
light from transformation, then
stopping the clock, does the clock really stop?
Well, the answer is yes. How do we know? Because people say their watches stop.
at the time of death and show them.
But I was intrigued that okay, I understand it's a pendulum clock, you know the narrow high ones
stopped because you have such a normal mechanical feeling
but they also stop the modern clock, which is LED
stop? And how do they do it?
Does the light turn off or how?
And we got one or two cases.
and this one is nice, someone came to tell one man that his brother had died
and when he entered his house
the man whose brother died told him it wasn't necessary
to tell me, I know
and when he asked him as he knew, he said
look at the clock. And they all stopped at the time of his death
and his time of death flashed. That's the story.
But there are many such stories about stopping clocks and the like.
The clock still stops even in this modern age.
Other things are cats and other animals howling at the time of death, which is quite common.
common enough for people to report it and birds
fascinating
When you talk to people in hospices, they will tell you that birds appear very often
on the window sills of people who died. I wish people would do simple experiments, just one camera.
put it on the window of the man who is dying and compare it
with the window of someone who does not die, it is such a simple, so simple experiment, either it is true or it is not.
So birds are commonly seen. The village of Massachusetts was here
where they described a man who was an admirer of owls
a white owl flew in and sat on a tree in the village
well documented that there are no white owls here
and the owl remained there until his burial, and flew away after his funeral. What does it mean? I don't know.
Has she been seen by others?
Seen by others, yes.
so these are all things that happen.
Do you have any idea how often these things occur?
In our questionnaires, we always asked what the frequency was.
You can do this in two ways, you can see how common it is in the sense
if a lot of our caregivers have seen it, it's probably much more common than not
so i can give you frequencies very easily
talking to caregivers, the frequency of death bed events was about 50%
but since we published these studies, other people have done it
and they did it in two ways
they did it by looking at graphs, in other words judging graphs
so they watched how many times people said they saw
visitors on a deathbed and the like, no one saw any of it
and another way is to ask the dying if they are at a given stage or to ask
nurses or relatives
and suddenly you get up to 80%, it's probably very common
but people just don't report it. And suddenly we know
That in the study of Monika Rensis 90%
90%, that's almost everyone
goes through this phase when he goes to an alternative reality and back
and he will have to give up everything and face non-duality, which is enormously important.
How can we achieve a good death?
I am now guided by all the experience I have
works of Monika Rensis
my work has shown that you will go into this alternative reality.
you will have your visitors on their deathbed and then you will slowly reach death
and many people will then really transgress.
I have 2 stories for it
One is my great friend Thetis Blacker, who was a religious florist
and I had an agreement with Thetis that when he died
so she'll let me know, and if I die first, I'll let her know
so we can talk about the dying process, because we talked a lot about it
And she died before I did, because I'm still here and she wasn't.
And she described what it was like for her and said how
approaching death, it was only a week before death.
She experienced a river full of love, golden love and light
which flowed through her room and through the hospice
And this type of phenomenon probably occurs quite often
but no one asks people about it and they also don't know how to include it in their understanding of the world.
but this type of things.
And another, which is an amazing book, he wrote a book about it
and this is Paul Robertson, the lead medics of the quartet
He and I knew each other very well and Paul had a near-death experience
and in his near-death experience
classifies the point of death
he says he has given up his body to join the cosmic consciousness
Joyfully, happily and willingly, as you can see he was disconnected and I think it is very good
a description of the process of death that we now have, with joy, love and willingness
and when he returned, he was able to talk about his near-death experience and the way he had changed his life
I had the same agreement with him
if I die before he does, he will come to be with me, but I was really lucky to be there the day before he died
and he was both inside and outside himself, but
unfortunately I couldn't stay long enough, but his wife was there the next day
and he slowly sank into unconsciousness
and he told his wife, tell Peter Fenwick it was exactly as we were talking
and then he died.
Interesting, I mean, you can't get much closer.
So I think the picture we have of dying from people who have died
he's basically pretty good, and I think you have to think about giving up everything
and then become non-dual and connected.
One of the interesting points of near-death experiences
that several of them become non-dual. What i mean?
This is in consciousness research
and it is one of the most interesting points of consciousness research
and that is that as you approach the process of awakening, in other words
to change the level of your consciousness to a wider consciousness
You basically have one of two features
you lose your talking self, those little parts of your self that keep talking to yourself
It will leave.
Next, you're still in the moment
you are not in the past or in the future, it means nothing to you.
If you ask them what the world is, they will say it here and now, that's it.
And what was he like?
It is not there, there is no "what will come in the future", you are only in the moment
Another thing is that you are incredibly happy
And you also tend to be transcendent
your personality is not in the narrator's voice here
You have become non-dual and you connect with reality.
There's a man named Jeffrey Martin in the states
and he collected such 1,500 cases
they are ordinary people who have done it, so we know that this state exists and we know how it exists
and connections with near-death experiences
it is here due to non-dual elements in near-death experiences.
and dying, the question is whether they are the same or not.
and whether people can become non-dual in near-death experiences
And the answer can be yes. And how do I know?
Because I talked to people who had a near-death experience, actually just two
But I only needed two to describe the non-dual state
So there may be a change in your level of consciousness when you return from a near-death experience.
So the idea that near-death experiences could have something to do with dying
and relatively narrowly in terms of consciousness and change of consciousness
it starts to make sense in a very interesting way.
Do you think there is a connection between how we think and how we live our lives
and between the way we experience death and what comes after it.
It is the way of life that you lead
will it affect the way you die?
Yes it will affect you, but you have to be very careful here
Because, we have a lot of people who say it's all material
I'll just go into the darkness and nothing.
And they say this in advance ...
In advance, it is their structure of faith.
And what is quite clear is that as it approaches the process of death
they all give up this idea and everyone starts to wonder what is happening to them.
They no longer say they don't believe in anything.
The kind of thing they say, one woman who was absolutely sure
that after death there is nothing she still woke up from a coma and said, come on, move with it, I want to move on
and that was quite different from her position
so if you strongly believe in angels, you will probably see angels
this is what the southern part of North America sees according to the Biblebelt.
They showed it.
If you have led a good life, it will be different
from a bad life? I'll define it a bit more
If a good life means you are not strongly focused on yourself
in other words, you think of other people and do such things
then when you reach this stage all give up
you can get rid of it much easier because you are not self-centered
the next thing is guilt
because guilt is something that is very difficult for people to leave
all the things they have done for which they feel guilty are very difficult to give them up.
so when you think about
someone who has committed a lot of crimes and feels guilty about it
then it will be very difficult for them to give up everything
My colleagues ask me, what happens when you are a psychopath and you don't feel guilty?
I don't know, I've never seen a psychopath die, but I guess it's very easy for them, I don't know if they can give up everything.
So, it will be related to the quality of your life, the quality of your life will be related to
with your ability to give up everything, it will depend on how self-centered you are
the more self-centered you are, the harder it will be to give up everything.
Clichés that we can often find in movies and literature
that a good man has a good death, and a bad man has a bad death. Is this what you observed in your research?
I described it as a claim about the death of normal people
and the deaths of people who suffer from spiritual anxiety as they approach their deaths
so if people have spiritual anxiety, they remain attached.
And those who are free are not attached. So, based on this statement, you can say
that if they are guilty or unable to leave their personality, or their possessions or whatever
so such people will have a difficult death.
So it somehow corresponds to the literature, but not completely
It lacks the liner that you have to be able to give up everything.
So let's say you're a billionaire and you laugh at your friends and you say - now it's all yours
Give it up and dive to death, it's fine, no problem
Many of my colleagues and many doctors say that these are just hallucinations, what can you say about that?
So people claim that all these things we found in the dying are hallucinations.
That's terminology, isn't it?
What is a hallucination? Hallucinations are an experience that only you and no one else has.
so there are a lot of hallucinations
so the fact that they are hallucinations doesn't really say anything
but when you look at the data, the relatives are in the same room
often, not actually often, rarely sees
visitors on a deathbed, but they see there are quite a good number
children see them more than adults and sometimes even hospice nurses see them
So based on that, these are not hallucinations in these cases
so why would you say that some are hallucinations and some are not
it makes no sense
calling them hallucinations means that you want to get rid of the topic, now let's talk about something interesting ...
but they are not, it does not help
Yes, there are also so-called infernal near-death experiences, what can you say about them?
So some people report hellish experiences, I have some difficulties with them
because in the ones we took in our research
or in the letters people wrote, there was always a clear explanation of what a hellish experience it was
I'll give you an example. One man had a near-death experience
he suddenly realized that he had left his body and was in a hellish world
and there were many demons trying to deceive him
and tortured him, and he knew he was in a hellish world because he could feel the flames of hell burning him
and how he felt better because he was in the intensive care unit
he realized that his infernal experience was in fact coming
from the heated mat on which he lay
and this led to a misinterpretation of the thermal sensor data
and demons, so it's pretty easy to figure out
because he said it was the nurses who went there to give him injections and do things like that
so it was his interpretation, it was an illusory experience
he got very close to what is called intensive care psychosis
because it's paranoia when you think people are doing terrible things to you
So it has a rational explanation, you don't have to assume hell
But the question is, is there really any hell where people can go?
I have no near-death experience, no real experience where people would report that there was hell.
they just don't do it
in our sample of near-death experiences it was about 4%, it's probably maybe less
because let us remember that ours were questionnaires for sent letters
and you probably won't go write a letter to someone who did a show about ZBS
in which you will write that your ZBS was a punishment and you were pulled by demons, certainly not.
So we probably have a basis in this regard.
but the ones we have in our sample
I would not say that they were of the same type and order as
near-death experiences. Other people think I'm wrong about this.
So obviously you can interpret the data in both directions.
So what did you learn from all this, is there a message for our culture?
I think the experience I found out
about experiences close to death and dying, carry a very important message for our culture
I'm absolutely one with the Dalai Lama in the first part
He says any culture
which sweeps her dead under the rug and can't recognize them
is a society that is greedy
because you collect things and you own them
you can be mad at people
because it's okay to have enemies
and you are very self-centered
because you will live forever
And when you look at our culture, it contains very strong symptoms of this
So I think the way we medicalize death, sweep it away, don't talk about it
produces exactly the company in which we deny our responsibility
look, every hundred years, we'll all be swept away just like that.
and yet we're not talking about it, so that's point one
The next point is that we should start
telling children what it's like to die that we will all eventually die and discuss it
one of my grandchildren came down and found that the dog had gotten to the garden
and bit off the head of two of his hamsters
at that moment he is confronted with death
These animals, which he adored to repair, have been destroyed and this raises questions
Will they all go to hamster heaven?
Or are we all just machines?
What does death mean? So you can see that very crucial questions await you relatively soon
but if you go to a class full of children and ask how many of you have experienced someone's death?
Many of them have grandparents who have died, they know about it
so it should be in the school curriculum, we should teach them
that death is a normal part of life
and you actually receive death when you receive birth. Death, birth and dying are all part of the same gear.
and it will happen to us all
and there is nothing to fear or fear
What you should do is like going to the exam, you should prepare for it.
and when you go to the final stage of death, you should prepare for it
and then you can talk about the phenomena that occur and so on
but it's very important that we stop sweeping under the rug
And do you know why we sweep it under the rug?
Because we are not dying as before.
If I were from a Victorian family,
I would already have two or three siblings who died, very young.
there were no antibiotics
Maintaining order and preventing infections was not a top priority
so people died and children in particular, so death was ubiquitous
so the Victorians talked about her much more than we did
Have you ever seen a horse go on a journey in our culture?
What is followed?
Cars in the distance that drive slowly?
Not everyone has their hands on the horn, so hurry, let's go, fast
there is no respect
Do you stand with your arms crossed and your head bowed as the horse passes? Of course not.
You are in charge of many other more important things because you do not respect death.
it's that simple and very important
nothing weird about it, we'll all do it, so we should know.
simple
Dr. Fenwick, thank you very much for your time and for your interesting suggestions
and knowledge from your research, thank you very much.
and thank you very much for your questions.
you